Aim 1: Generate a catalog of potential pioneer factors in lymphoid cells

Rationale and Hypothesis:
The established dogma of nuclear accessibility during cell development hypothesizes that the genome in stem cells is in an open chromatin state, and open genomic sites are subsequently closed in a step-wise fashion during differentiation until a terminal cell product is reached. One problem with such a hypothesis is that the nucleus of a cell is limited in volume and there is simply too much DNA that it would be infeasible for all genomic sites relevant to the vast multitude of possible final cell products to be open and accessible, because this could possibly require more space than is available. Additionally, every step from totipotency to terminal differentiation requires the establishment of a stable genomic state encoding for cell-specific commitments that can be propagated to daughter cells. Profiling of genome-wide histone modifications in embryonic stem cells and terminally differentiated cells reveals that chromatin states at key regulatory genes describe developmental commitment and potential (T. S. Mikkelsen et al., Nature 448, 553–560 (2007). Clearly, understanding cellular states during development requires an understanding of how relevant genomic positions are made accessible at different times during differentiation, and how the state of the local histone modifications at these sites are regulated.

Genomic sites in progenitor cells that are closed, i.e. DNA occluded by nucleosomes, but that contain key regulatory genes necessary for development into terminally differentiated cells must be made accessible for transcription factor binding through some mechanism. One such mechanism is through the action of a special class of transcription factors, known as pioneer transcription factors, that are able to bind occluded DNA, facilitate nucleosome ejection, and to stabilize enhanceosome formation (Zaret, K. S., & Carroll, J. S. (2011). These pioneer transcription factors recognize a degenerate form of their consensus sequence in closed heterochromatin, and are able to bind in vitro to these regions. Upon binding, these pioneer transcription factors are able to recruit other factors that cause local modifications to the histone proteins, facilitate nucleosome ejection, and stabilize the binding of other developmentally important transcription factors. 

Hematopoiesis is a useful model system for studying cell development because there are well-defined, easy to collect progenitor cells, distinct intermediate cell types, and terminally differentiated cells with a variety of unique effector functions and phenotypes. A recent study by blank et. al. in 2014 generated a new technique for ChIP-seq that was termed an 'indexing-first' approach that enables ChIP-seq to be used on fewer number of cells and applied this technique to study the dynamics of chromatin modifications during hematopoiesis.

Therefore, I hypothesize that the 

1.1 To generate a set of uniquely open genomic sites in  