Story needs a beginning, a middle, and an end


Unfortunately many great medical advances have happened at the expense of human lives. One of this incidents happened with The Radium Girls – led to increased incidents of cancer. After the bombing of the 

A significant finding that a transplantable multipotent adult bone marrow cell with clonally demonstrable hematopoietic activity with experiments showing that an intravenous transplant of normal adult mouse bone marrow cells could protect recipients from a lethal dose of radiation by replacing the destroyed blood-forming system with new and sustained source of lymphoid and myeloid cells. Over time the developmental stages of hematopoiesis became to be understand, however the transcription factors that cause this development is not well understood. 

The study of transcription factors important to development has historically been carried out during the developmental stages of an organism. However, hematopoiesis is a unique setting that happens during the adult stage. The genome of an adult is typically considered closed to further development. Stem cell like cells can be induced by the addition of pioneer factors. Can the same be done for immune cells. Can immune cells be reprogrammed to other immune cell types? Do pioneer transcription factors exist in hematopoiesis? 

The development of cells 
PU.1 is a master regulatory of myeloid and 

Place your work in the history of others so that it can be remembered. Any famous pioneer transcription factors? Any historical works in immune cell development?

The fundamental mechanism of cell development and differentiation is the coordinated action of a complex network of transcription factors. These transcription factors can bind to promoter sequences near transcription start sites to regulate transcription directly or bind to enhancer sequences thousands of base pairs from the gene they regulate. A special class of transcription factors, known as pioneer transcription factors, can bind to closed DNA sequences occluded by nucleosomes and open these stretches of DNA to commit cells to certain developmental fate decisions or even to reprogram cells. The developmental fate decisions made by these pioneer transcription factors are crucial for embryonic development to develop the zygote into the all the different cell type lineages of the adult organism. The cells in a developed adult have already been terminally differentiated with stable gene expression and are no longer under the influence of pioneer transcription factors. However, hematopoiesis is one system in which this process is happening continually throughout the lifespan of higher order eukaryotes. The presence of pioneer transcription factors during the development of immune cells could have important implications in human health and disease.

Cooperative binding of sequence-specific transcription factors in place of nucleosomes leads to an open chromatin state that allows for gene expression. These open chromatin stretches of genome are also more accessible to nucleases, and can be probed for using Next Gen Sequencing methods such as DNase I hypersensitivity or ATAC-seq. In hematopoiesis, a single progenitor, pluripotent stem cell can give rise to all the cell types found in the blood including erythrocytes, myeloid cells, and lymphoid cells. Probing these open chromatin states using next gen sequencing methods during different steps of hematopoiesis could elucidate potential binding sites of the pioneer transcription factors. Motif analysis of these DNA segments could reveal pioneer transcription factors during lymphoid development.


This universal transition represents a major reprogramming event that requires (1) chromatin remodelling to provide transcriptional competency; (2) specific activation of a new transcriptional program; and (3) clearance of the previous transcriptional program. (Lee, 2013)

Beginning: 

Conception and Birth
A child inherits approximately 23,000 genes from her parents. This inherited genomic information is known as the “structural genome” and can be likened to computer code: a set of instructions, that when executed, perform a certain function. The genome of eukaryotes can be chemically modified on either the DNA or on the proteins that wrap the DNA, known as chromatin, to influence how this genomic "code" is read and interpreted. These chemical modifications comprise a field of study known as epigenetics, meaning "on the genome" from the greek root 'epi' which means 'on or upon.' These epigenetic modifications are applied in select regions of the genome and signal local activity states, such as gene transcription or silencing. These states can have remarkable influences on cellular development and cell fate that can be manifest in distinct phenotypic traits in an individual. For example, environmental conditions can cause epigenetic modifications to the genome of an individual at a critical period of development, and this pattern can be set for the rest of her life. During World War II, Nazi blockade of the port of Amsterdam in 1944 arrested the import of food to the Dutch people. The resulting famine, known as the "Dutch Winter," left 18,000 people dead before the blockade could be relieved by the Allies in 1945. The children born during this time of famine had a propensity to becoming obese later in life compared to their parents, despite sharing similar genetic code. This propensity to obesity was the result of certain epigenetic changes to the genome during fetal development--such as demethylation of the Insulin like growth factor locus. These early embryonic epigenetic modifications had lasting effects and although the genetic code was not changed, how this code was being interpreted by developing cells was drastically different.

Environmental pressures that influence the epigenome--and thus how the genetic code is read--have their strongest effects during early embryonic development as embryonic stem cells differentiate into specialized, terminal cell types. These terminally differentiated cells, that comprise the majority of an adult individual, do not respond to environmental pressures once past this critical stage of development. The epigenome has been "cemented down" for most of the cells in an individual once reaching adulthood. However, hematopoiesis is one system in which cells are continually developing and differentiating. The epigenomes of developing hematopoietic cells respond to external stimuli much in the same way as a developing fetal cells during the "Dutch Winter." Instead of famine, these external stimuli arise from the wide variety of infections that an individual may encounter during his lifetime. These external stimuli can shape the epigenome of developing immune cells to influence effector functions and the corresponding immune response. For example, in T cell exhaustion, chronic T cell receptor stimulation from the presence of persistent antigen appears to drive epigenetic changes in T cells that make it difficult to reinvigorate the T cells longterm even after treatment with immune checkpoint inhibitors. Clearly, the epigenetic processes that underlie the process of lymphoid cell development to these chronic antigens has durable, long-lasting effects on the dynamics of T cell responses and also possibly for the memory recall response to reinfection. 

The fundamental mechanism of cell development and differentiation is the coordinated action of a complex network of transcription factors. These transcription factors can bind to promoter sequences near transcription start sites to regulate transcription directly or bind to enhancer sequences thousands of base pairs from the gene they regulate. A special class of transcription factors, known as pioneer transcription factors, can bind to closed DNA sequences occluded by nucleosomes and open these stretches of DNA to activate gene expression and to commit cells to certain developmental fate decisions. The developmental fate decisions made by these pioneer transcription factors are crucial during embryonic development of the totipotent zygote to the wide variety of terminally differentiated cells. Reintroduction of these pioneer factors through their ectopic expression in terminally differentiated cells, such as fibroblasts, can convert these cells back to a less-differentiated, pluripotent stem cell known as iPSCs. The cells in a developed individual have already been terminally differentiated with stable gene expression and are no longer under the influence of pioneer transcription factors unless artificially induced. However, hematopoiesis is one system in which the process of development is continually happening, and the presence of pioneer transcription factors during the development of lymphoid cells has not been well characterized and could have important implications in human health and disease. Understanding the transcription factors that influence chromatin states in lymphoid cells will provide insight into the process by which lymphoid cells develop during immune responses and possibly allow us to manufacture epigenetic modifications to achieve a desired immune responses.



Cooperative binding of sequence-specific pioneer transcription factors in place of nucleosomes leads to an open chromatin state that allows for gene expression. These open chromatin stretches of genome are also more accessible to nucleases, and can be probed for using Next Gen Sequencing methods such as DNase I hypersensitivity or ATAC-seq. In hematopoiesis, a single progenitor, pluripotent stem cell can give rise to all the cell types found in the blood including erythrocytes, myeloid cells, and lymphoid cells. Probing these open chromatin states using next gen sequencing methods during different steps of hematopoiesis could elucidate potential binding sites of the pioneer transcription factors. Motif analysis of these DNA segments could reveal pioneer transcription factors during lymphoid development.


The genomes of eukaryotes carry chemical marks that are added to either DNA or chromatin proteins. This epigenetic information is not uniform, but is applied regionally, and it signals or preserves local activity states, such as gene transcription or silencing
